Day 1: 8/26/14
What do you think is the most important problem facing this country today?
Immigration (people decided this is the most important)
Different groups are worried about different things
Social problems may or may not reflect reality:
When it does: Unemployment rates increased in 2009, and so did the mention of the economy
When it doesn’t: obesity, cigarettes, and alcohol: it’s talked about a lot, but the increase of % of obese people does not directly correlate
Social Problems are constructed
Experts
Media
Public
Policymakers
3 constructed parts: cause, problem, solution
What are social problems?
Changes over time, depends on who we ask, why do we care, should we solve them,
4 questions: What is a social problem? Who decides? What are its causes? What are its solutions?
Discussion
Moral Panic: “Moral panic is an extreme social response to the belief that the moral condition of society is deteriorating at a rapid pace. Numerous sociologists have interpreted moral panic as a device used to distract public attention from underlying social problems and justify increased social control over the working class and other potentially rebellious segments of society”
Ex. witch-burning, Arabs after 9/11, Boogyman, Jewish Expulsions 
Stranger Danger- kidnaps usually happen within families and not from strangers, but caused 24/7 TV, etc.

Day 2: 8/27/14
Definition of Social Problems
Objective: Social problems are things that harm society
How do we define harm? Who gets to decide?
Not all things that are harmful are identified as social problems
Disagreement over why things are harmful
Vague definition- covers huge range of issues
Subjective approach: social problems are conditions that people have subjective reactions to and respond to by calling for change
Not the objective quality of a condition but the objective reaction that makes something a social problem
The social problems PROCESS: process of conditions being recognized as social problems
Aren’t some conditions objective social problems?
Killing another person
Self defense
War
Death penalty
Poverty
Discrimination
Social Problems are Socially Constructed
Social Construction: process of assigning meaning to people, objects, and phenomena in the world in order to make sense of it within our society
Ex. Michelle and Barack Obama’s fist bump means that they are “terrorists” LOL
Social Construction of Race
Race is socially constructed: we assign meaning to particular characteristics
Changing constructions reflected in the Census questionnaires
1790: free white males, free white females, all other frees, slaves
1870: white, black, mulatto, Indian
Social Construction of Race among Latinos
“Where in the world is Juan- and what color is her?” Puliod & Pastor 2013
How do Hispanics identify race in 2010?
Age, income, and education tend to “whiten” latinos
Crime is socially constructed
Graffiti 
Vandalization
Banksy- beautiful graffiti
Documentary ‘Exit through the gift shop”
Social Construction and social problems
Everything is socially constructed: objective conditions are assigned meaning through social constructions
Social problems are constructed through a process
People find a condition troubling (subjective reaction)
They draw attention to it and make a claim that it needs to be changed
Four Part Social Problems Process
An alleged condition (someone makes a claim)
Incompatible with the values of (someone has a reaction)
Significant number of people (either number or type of claimsmakers is significant enough to gain attention)
Who agree that action is needed to alter the situation (public reaction and policymaking)
Is sitting a social problem? How do we know?
An alleged situation that is
Incompatible with the values of
A significant number of people…
An Alleged Situation
Claims are made
Does it have to be “real”?
Google “sitting is the new smoking”
Significant number of people
Some people are more significant than others 
In terms of type of reaction
Social class, age, job, prestige, position of power
Case of sittings: executives
Subjective/Social Construction perspective on social problems
Example of sitting demonstrates that a wide range of phenomena can be considered social problems
This perspective encourages us to start by asking, is this a social problem?
Since social conditions are not objectively harmful, we cannot approach social problems by only studying the social conditions
Next time: 
Best Ch 2 “Claims”
